 Effects and Coeffects in Call-by-Push-Value
--------------------------------------------


* Proof organization 

This proof is broken into several subdirectories. Please see the README.md
files in the individual subdirectories for their contents.
  
  - `autosubst2`: Two files distributed with Autosubst 2. These files have
    been slightly edited to make them compatible with Coq 8.19.0.

 - `common`: Files used by all subsections. This includes axiomatization for
    the effects and coeffect structures as well as an additional library for
    working with boundned natural numbers.

  - `effects`: Results in Section 2 (Effects)

  - `general` : Results in Section 3 (Coeffects, Version 1)

  - `resource` : Soundness results in Section 4, except for translation proofs (Coeffects, Version 2)

  - `full`: Results in Section 5 and translation proofs for Section 4 (Combined system)

* Definition and Lemma correspondence

The [extended version](`paper.pdf`) includes footnotes with each lemma
statement, that indicate the appropriate definition and source file.

* Required Axioms and assumptions

  + Functional extensionality (`autosubst2/axioms.v`) (from Autosubst)
  + Axiomatization of effects (`common/effects.v`)
  + Axiomatization of coeffects (`common/coeffects.v`)
  + Additional resource-tracking-specific axiomatization of coeffects
     (`common/resource_axioms.v`)
  + Axiomatization of discardable effects (`common/junk_axioms.v`)

* System requirements and build instructions

Compiles with The Coq Proof Assistant, version 8.19.0. The development
requires the Autosubst 2 tool to regenerate the syntax files, but these files
are included in the distribution and do not need to be recreated.

All proofs can be compiled using the `make` command from the toplevel directory.

NOTE: The Makefile commands `make` and `make clean` will not regenerate or remove
these files respectively; `make fullmake` and `make fullclean` will do so and
so require Autosubst 2.

* Formalization overview

This formalization includes multiple base languages (CBPV, CBN, CBV) with
multiple type systems (effects/general coeffects/resource
coeffects/combined). In general, we use the following abbreviation for the
base language:

  - CBPV = Call-By-Push-Value
  - CBN = Call-By-Name lambda-calculus
  - CBV = Call-By-Value lambda-calculus

Each language has its own version of some subset of the following files:

  - `syntax.sig`    : Autosubst definition of the syntax
  - `syntax.v`      : Definition of syntax, generated by Autosubst 2
  - `typing.v`      : Typing rules
  - `semantics.v`   : Big-step, environment based operational semantics
  - `semtyping.v`   : Definition of the logical relation and "semantic" typing rules
    (i.e. lemmas about the logical relation that mirror the typing rules)
  - `soundness.v`   : Fundamental theorem of the logical relation, plus corollaries
  - `renaming.v`    : Typing judgment stable under variable renaming
  - `translation.v` : Definition of a translation from the language to CBPV
  - `proofs.v`      : Proofs that the translation preserves types

* Syntax overview

In each case, the syntax of the language has been generated using the
Autosubst 2 tool, which represents variable binding using de Bruijn
indices. Each syntactic form is indexed by a natural number (the scoping
depth). The variable constructor uses a bounded natural number (`fin n`) as a
index to ensure that all variable references are in scope.

We use the metavariables `V` and `M` for the syntax of CBPV values (`Val n`)
and computations (`Comp n`) and `A` and `B` for CBPV value types (`ValTy`) and
computation types (`CompTy`). 

We use the metavariables `e` for lambda calculus terms (`Tm n`) and `T` for
lambda calculus types (`Ty`).

Typing contexts (`Γ`) and environments (`ρ`) are represented as functions from
variable indices (`fin n`) to types and values. These functions can only be
applied to variables that are currently in scope. The cons infix operation
`.:` extends a function to a larger scope.

Effects are notated by the metavariable `ϕ`; the identity effect is `ϵ` and
effects can be combined with the infix operator `E+` and compared using the
infix predicate `E<=`.

Coeffects are notated by the metavariable `q`, with identity elemetnts `Qzero`
and `Qone`. Individual coeffects can be compared with `Qle`, added with `Qadd`
and multiplied with `Qmult`.

A sequence of coeffects is a grade vector `γ`, which can be added pointwise
with `Q+`, multiplied by a single coeffect with `Q*`, and compared pointwise
with `Q<=`. Grade vectors can also be extended using the infix notation `.:`.
The notation `0s` creates a grade vector containing only `Qzero` elements.
